Contents
Cake
Cakeis aflour confectionmade fromflour, sugar, and other ingredients and is usuallybaked. In their oldest forms, cakes were modifications ofbread, but cakes now cover a wide range of preparations that can be simple or elaborate and which share features withdessertssuch aspastries,meringues,custards, andpies.
The most common ingredients include flour, sugar, eggs, fat (such asbutter,oil, ormargarine), a liquid, and aleavening agent, such asbaking sodaorbaking powder. Common additional ingredients includedried,candied, or fresh fruit,nuts,cocoa, andextractssuch as vanilla, with numerous substitutions for the primary ingredients. Cakes can also be filled withfruit preserves, nuts, or dessert sauces (likecustard,jelly, cookedfruit,whipped cream, orsyrups),[1]iced withbuttercreamor othericings, and decorated withmarzipan, piped borders, or candied fruit.
Cake is often served as a celebratory dish on ceremonial occasions, such as weddings,anniversaries, and birthdays. There are countless cake recipes; some are bread-like, some are rich and elaborate, and many are centuries old. Cake making is no longer a complicated procedure; while at one time considerable labor went into cake making (particularly thewhiskingof egg foams), baking equipment and directions have been simplified so that even the most amateur of cooks may bake a cake.
History
The term "cake" has a long history. The word itself is ofVikingorigin, from theOld Norseword "kaka".[2]
The ancient Greeks called cake πλακοῦς (plakous), which was derived from the word for "flat", πλακόεις (plakoeis). It was baked using flour mixed with eggs, milk, nuts, and honey. They also had a cake called "satura", which was a flat, heavy cake. During the Roman period, the name for cake became "placenta", which was derived from the Greek term. A placenta was baked on a pastry base or inside a pastry case.[3]
The Greeks invented beer as aleavener,fryingfrittersinolive oil, andcheesecakesusinggoat's milk.[4]Inancient Rome, the basic bread dough was sometimes enriched with butter, eggs, and honey, which produced a sweet and cake-like baked good.[5]TheLatinpoetOvidrefers to his and his brother's birthday party and cake in his first book of exile,Tristia.[6]
Early cakes in England were also essentially bread: the most obvious differences between a "cake" and "bread" were the round, flat shape of the cakes and the cooking method, which turned cakes over once while cooking, while bread was left upright throughout the baking process.[5]
Sponge cakes, leavened with beaten eggs, originated duringthe Renaissance, possibly inSpain.[7]
Cake mixes
During theGreat Depression, there was a surplus ofmolassesand the need to provide easily made food to millions of economically depressed people in the United States.[8]One company patented a cake-bread mix to deal with this economic situation and thereby established the first line of cake in a box. In so doing, cake, as it is known today, became amass-producedgood rather than a home- or bakery-made specialty.
Later, during thepost-war boom, other American companies (notablyGeneral Mills) developed this idea further, marketing cake mix on the principle of convenience, especially to housewives. When sales dropped heavily in the 1950s, marketers discovered that baking cakes, once a task at which housewives could exercise skill and creativity, had become dispiriting. This was a period in American ideological history when women, retired from the war-time labor force, were confined to thedomestic spherewhile still exposed to the blossoming consumerism in the US.[9]This inspiredpsychologistErnest Dichterto find a solution to the cake mix problem in thefrosting.[10]Since making the cake was so simple, housewives and other in-home cake makers could expend their creative energy oncake decoratinginspired by, among other things, photographs in magazines of elaborately decorated cakes.
Ever since cake in a box has become a staple of supermarkets and is complemented with frosting in a can.
Varieties
Cakes are broadly divided into several categories, based primarily on ingredients and mixing techniques.
Although clear examples of the difference between cake and bread are easy to find, the precise classification has always been elusive.[5]
Butter cake
Butter cakesare made from creamed butter, sugar, eggs, and flour. They rely on the combination of butter and sugar beaten for an extended time to incorporate air into the batter.[11]A classicpound cakeis made with a pound each of butter, sugar, eggs, and flour. Another type of butter cake that takes its name from the proportion of ingredients used is1-2-3-4 cake: 1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 3 cups flour, and 4 eggs.[12]According to Beth Tartan, this cake was one of the most common among theAmerican pioneerswho settled North Carolina.[13]
Baking powderis in many butter cakes, such asVictoria sponge.[14]The ingredients are sometimes mixed without creaming the butter, using recipes for simple and quick cakes.[citation needed]
Sponge cake
Sponge cakes(or foam cakes) are made from whipped eggs, sugar, and flour. Traditional sponge cakes are leavened only with eggs. They rely primarily on trapped air in a protein matrix (generally beaten eggs) to provideleavening, sometimes with a bit ofbaking powderor other chemical leaven added. Egg-leavened sponge cakes are thought to be the oldest cakes made without yeast.
Angel food cakeis awhite cakethat uses only the whites of the eggs and is traditionally baked in a tube pan. The FrenchGénoiseis a sponge cake that includesclarified butter. Highly decorated sponge cakes with lavish toppings are sometimes calledgateau, the French word for cake.Chiffon cakesare sponge cakes with vegetable oil, which adds moistness.[15]
Chocolate cake
Chocolate cakesare butter cakes, sponge cakes, or other cakes flavored with melted chocolate orcocoa powder.[16]German chocolate cakeis a variety of chocolate cake.Fudge cakesarechocolate cakesthat containfudge.
Coffee cake
Coffee cakeis generally thought of as a cake to serve with coffee or tea at breakfast or acoffee break. Some types use yeast as a leavening agent, while others use baking soda or baking powder. These cakes often have a crumb topping calledstreuselor a light glaze drizzle.
Flourless cake
Baked flourless cakes include bakedcheesecakesandflourless chocolate cakes.
Layer cakes
Layer cakesare cakes made with layers of sponge or butter cake filled with cream, jam, or other filling to hold the layers together.
One-egg cake
One-egg cakes are made with one egg. They can be made with butter[17]or vegetable shortening.[18]One egg cake was an economical recipe when using two eggs for each cake was too costly.[19]
Comparison with bread
Although clear examples of the difference between cake and bread are easy to find, the precise classification has always been elusive.[5]For example,banana breadmay be properly considered either aquick breador a cake.Yeastcakes are the oldest and are very similar to yeast bread. Such cakes are often very traditional in form and include such pastries asbabkaandstollen.
Special-purpose cakes
Cakes may be classified according to the occasion for which they are intended. For example,wedding cakes,birthday cakes, cakes forfirst communion, Christmas cakes,Halloweencakes, andPassoverplava (a type of sponge cake sometimes made withmatzomeal) are all identified primarily according to the celebration they are intended to accompany. The cutting of a wedding cake constitutes a social ceremony in some cultures. The Ancient Roman marriage ritual ofconfarreatiooriginated in the sharing of a cake.
Particular types of cake may be associated with particular festivals, such asstollenorchocolate log(at Christmas),babkaandsimnel cake(at Easter), ormooncake. There has been a long tradition of decorating an iced cake at Christmas time; other cakes associated with Christmas include chocolate log andmince pies.
A Lancashire Courting Cake is a fruit-filled cake baked by a fiancée for her betrothed. The cake has been described as "somewhere between a firm sponge – with a greater proportion of flour to fat and eggs than a Victoria sponge cake – and a shortbread base and was proof of the bride-to-be's baking skills".  Traditionally it is a two-layer cake filled and topped with strawberries or raspberries and whipped cream.[20]
A decoratedbirthday cake
AHalloween cakeshaped like a pumpkin
Wedding cakesat a bridal show
Shapes
Cakes are frequently described according to their physical form. Cakes may be small and intended for individual consumption. Larger cakes may be made to be sliced and served as part of a meal or social function. Common shapes include:
A plate of white chocolatecake balls
Thekransekageis an example of a conical cake.
Dobos torteis an older form oflayer cake.
Asheet cake
Cake flour
Special cake flour with a high starch-to-gluten ratio is made from fine-textured, soft, low-protein wheat. It is strongly bleached and compared to all-purpose flour, cake flour tends to result in cakes with a lighter, less dense texture.[21]Therefore, it is frequently specified or preferred in cakes meant to be soft, light or bright white, such asangel food cake. However, if cake flour is called for, a substitute can be made by replacing a small percentage of all-purpose flour with cornstarch or removing two tablespoons from each cup of all-purpose flour.[22][23][24]Some recipes explicitly specify or permit all-purpose flour, notably where a firmer or denser cake texture is desired.
Cooking
A cake can fail to bake properly, which is called "falling". In a cake that "falls", parts may sink or flatten, because it was baked at a temperature that is too low or too hot,[25][26]when it has been underbaked[26]and when placed in an oven that is too hot at the beginning of the baking process.[27]The use of excessive amounts of sugar, flour, fat or leavening can also cause a cake to fall.[27][28]A cake can also fall when subjected to cool air that enters an oven when the oven door is opened during the cooking process.[29]
Cake decorating
A finished cake is often enhanced by covering it withicing, or frosting, and toppings such assprinkles, which are also known as "jimmies" in certain parts of the United States and "hundreds and thousands" in the United Kingdom. The frosting is usually made from powdered (icing) sugar, sometimes a fat of some sort, milk or cream, and often flavorings such as avanilla extractorcocoa powder. Some decorators use a rolledfondant icing. Commercial bakeries tend to uselardfor the fat, and often whip the lard to introduce air bubbles. This makes the icing light and spreadable. Home bakers either use lard, butter,margarine, or some combination thereof. Sprinkles are small firm pieces of sugar and oils that are colored withfood coloring. In the late 20th century, new cake decorating products became available to the public. These include several specialized sprinkles and even methods to print pictures and transfer the image onto a cake.
Special tools are needed for more complexcake decorating, such aspiping bagsand various piping tips, syringes andembossing mats. To use a piping bag or syringe, a piping tip is attached to the bag or syringe using a coupler. The bag or syringe is partially filled with icing which is sometimes colored. Using different piping tips and various techniques, a cake decorator can make many different designs. Basic decorating tips include open star, closed star, basketweave, round, drop flower, leaf, multi, petal, and specialty tips. An embossing mat is used to create embossed effects. Acake turntablethat cakes are spun upon may be used in cake decoration.
Royal icing,marzipan(or a less sweet version, known asalmond paste), fondant icing
(also known as sugar paste), and buttercream are used as covering icings and to create decorations. Floralsugarcraftor wired sugar flowers are an important part of cake decoration. Cakes for special occasions, such as wedding cakes, are traditionally rich fruit cakes or occasionallyMadeira cakes, that are covered with marzipan and iced using royal icing or sugar-paste. They are finished with piped borders (made with royal icing) and adorned with a piped message, wired sugar flowers, hand-formed fondant flowers, marzipan fruit, piped flowers, or crystallized fruits or flowers such asgrapesorviolets.
A large cakegarnishedwith strawberries
A slice ofstrawberry cakewith garnishing of strawberry
Chocolatelayer cakewith chocolate frosting and shaved chocolate topping
Food safety
The shelf life of cakes packages for commercial sale depends on several factors. Cakes are intermediate moisture products prone to mold growth. Commercial cakes are frequently and commonly exposed to different mold varieties before they are packaged for sale, includingAspergillus flavusand variousPenicillins, andAspergillus niger. Preservatives and oxygen absorbents are currently used to control and inhibit mold growth.
The CDC has recommended not to eat raw cake batter because it can contain pathogens likeSalmonellaandE. coli.  Cake batter uses raw flour which can contain live bacteria and present a hazard if consumed.[30]
See also
References
External links
